# py-ciu

*Explainable Machine Learning through Contextual Importance and Utility*

**NOTE: This python implementation is partially work in progress. Notably, the core CIU development is still done in "R" and some of the functionality present in the R version may not be available in this python version.**

The *py-ciu* library provides methods to generate post-hoc explanations for
machine learning-based classifiers.

# What is CIU?

**Remark**: It seems like Github Markdown doesn’t show correctly the “{”
and “}” characters in Latex equations, whereas they are shown correctly
in Rstudio. Therefore, in most cases where there is an $i$ shown in
Github, it actually signifies `{i}` and where there is an $I$ it
signifies `{I}`.

CIU is a model-agnostic method for producing outcome explanations of
results of any “black-box” model `y=f(x)`. CIU directly estimates two
elements of explanation by observing the behaviour of the black-box
model (without creating any “surrogate” model `g` of `f(x)`).

**Contextual Importance (CI)** answers the question: ***how much can the
result (or the utility of it) change as a function of feature*** $i$ or a
set of features $\{i\}$ jointly, in the context $x$?

**Contextual Utility (CU)** answers the question: ***how favorable is the
current value*** of feature $i$ (or a set of features $\{i\}$ jointly) for a good
(high-utility) result, in the context $x$?

CI of one feature or a set of features (jointly) $\{i\}$ compared to a
superset of features $\{I\}$ is defined as

$$
\omega_{j,\{i\},\{I\}}(x)=\frac{umax_{j}(x,\{i\})-umin_{j}(x,\{i\})}{umax_{j}(x,\{I\})-umin_{j}(x,\{I\})},  
$$

where $\{i\} \subseteq \{I\}$ and $\{I\} \subseteq \{1,\dots,n\}$. $x$
is the instance/context to be explained and defines the values of input
features that do not belong to $\{i\}$ or $\{I\}$. In practice, CI is
calculated as:

$$
\omega_{j,\{i\},\{I\}}(x)= \frac{ymax_{j,\{i\}}(x)-ymin_{j,\{i\}}(x)}{ ymax_{j,\{I\}}(x)-ymin_{j,\{I\}}(x)}, 
$$

where $ymin_{j}()$ and $ymax_{j}()$ are the minimal and maximal $y_{j}$
values observed for output $j$.

CU is defined as

$$
CU_{j,\{i\}}(x)=\frac{u_{j}(x)-umin_{j,\{i\}}(x)}{umax_{j,\{i\}}(x)-umin_{j,\{i\}}(x)}. 
$$

When $u_{j}(y_{j})=Ay_{j}+b$, this can be written as:

$$
CU_{j,\{i\}}(x)=\left|\frac{ y_{j}(x)-yumin_{j,\{i\}}(x)}{ymax_{j,\{i\}}(x)-ymin_{j,\{i\}}(x)}\right|, 
$$

where $yumin=ymin$ if $A$ is positive and $yumin=ymax$ if $A$ is
negative.

## Usage

First install the `py-ciu` package. The recommended approach is to clone this repository and use it from there. 

The other approach is to install it using `pip install py-ciu` but since the development of CIU is sometimes quite rapid, you should not except that all functionality is available in that version.

Usage examples are available as a Jupyter notebook [py-ciu_README_notebook.ipynb](py-ciu_README_notebook.ipynb). 

The output of running that notebook is also accessible as *[a PDF document here](docs/py-ciu_README_notebook.pdf)* (unfortunately the Markdown and HTML outputs generated by Jupyter notebook don't work properly here for the moment).

# Related resources

The original R implementation can be found at: <https://github.com/KaryFramling/ciu>

There are also two implementations of CIU for explaining images:

- R: <https://github.com/KaryFramling/ciu.image>

- Python: <https://github.com/KaryFramling/py.ciu.image>

Image explanation packages can be considered to be at proof-of-concept
level (Nov. 2022). Future work on image explanation will presumably
focus on the Python version, due to the extensive use of deep neural
networks that tend to be implemented mainly for Python.

## Authors
* [Vlad Apopei](https://github.com/vladapopei/)
* [Kary Främling](https://github.com/KaryFramling)
* [Timotheus Kampik](https://github.com/TimKam/)

The current version of py-ciu re-uses research code provided by [Timotheus Kampik](https://github.com/TimKam/) and replaces it. The old code is available in the branch "Historical".
